# Criticism and justification for Edward Snowden
In this document, I discuss two articles about a controversial figure, Edward Snowden.  I present and discuss both the supporting view and criticism on this person.

## Article 1
In this Washington Times opinion piece, ["Edward Snowden: A hero of truth banished from America."](https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2022/sep/28/edward-snowden-a-hero-of-truth-banished-from-ameri/), Andrew Napolitano outlines the actions which caused Edward Snowden, a former CIA agent and employee of the National Security Agency, to be indicted by the Trump administration for violating the 1917 Espionage Act. At the time of the publication of this article, in late September last year, Snowden had just been given citizenship by Russia, where he had sought refuge in 2013. Napolitano’s article provides a legal and historical explanation of the laws which Snowden allegedly violated as well as his purported justifications for doing so.

The author stresses the primacy of the US Constitution as the highest law in the land. Specifically, the Fourth Amendment provides a vital safeguard against authoritarian invasions of privacy by requiring evidence both that a crime was committed and that it is more likely than not that executing the warrant will provide more evidence of the crime before Federal law enforcement can obtain a warrant to spy on the private communications of American citizens. The Fourth Amendment was considered a pillar of American democracy, until Republican President Richard Nixon desired to override its provisions in order to spy on anti-war activists during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Nixon created the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, or FISA court, which meets in secret and uses an unconstitutional standard of probable cause to issue warrants, namely, that an individual may be communicating with someone in a foreign country, which could mean (to use examples provided by the article) that one has messaged one’s cousin in Toronto on Facebook or emailed a bookstore in the UK. Snowden leaked information revealing that the NSA and CIA were using FISA warrants to spy, without warrants or any evidence of crimes being committed, on tens of millions of American citizens, capturing enough data to fill 27 Libraries of Congress every year.

In the view of Napolitano, this warrantless spying constituted a violation of Americans’ fundamental right to privacy and allowed government agencies to treat ordinary citizens as if they were criminals, without any justification or disclosure. In leaking this information, Snowden made Americans aware of how they were being deceived and targeted, thus allowing them to take action to defend their rights and demand accountability from their officials. While the NSA and CIA surveillance occurred under both Democrat and Republican administrations, Napolitano seems to single out Trump, Bush and Nixon for criticism, perhaps because, especially in the Trump years, the GOP have presented themselves as defenders of free speech and American values, thus the Trump administration’s indictment of Snowden reveals their hypocrisy on this issue.

## Article 2
Fred Fleitz’s article in National Review, ["Edward Snowden’s new Russian citizenship proves again he is a traitor."](https://www.nationalreview.com/corner/edward-snowdens-new-russian-citizenship-proves-again-he-is-a-traitor/), was written only two days prior to the above-mentioned article in The Washington Times and discusses the same topic of Edward Snowden and his leaking of classified documents to the media and public in the context of Snowden being granted citizenship by Russia. Fleitz served for 25 years with the CIA and other government security agencies, though he does not discuss how this conflict of interest might impact his view of Snowden’s actions within the article. In contrast to Napolitano’s article, Fleitz does not bother to analyze Snowden’s own motivations for leaking information concerning NSA and CIA spying on American citizens and instead focuses on his own interpretations of Russia’s grant of citizenship and his criticisms of Snowden.

Fleitz believes that Russian President Vladimir Putin granted citizenship to Snowden to embarrass the United State and to compensate for the difficulties Russia is experiencing on the battlefield in Ukraine. This may be correct as far as the citizenship decision by Russia is concerned, but it is a very weak argument: it is simply incredulous that Russia’s military situation in late 2022 can in any way provide an explanation for Edward Snowden’s leaking of documents in the US in 2013, fully nine years prior to the beginning of the Russia-Ukraine war and while Snowden was still residing in the US, with no ties to Russia. Ultimately, this seems like an ad hominem attack, trying to trick the reader into focusing on the idea that, since Russia approved of something someone did, this individual must be a bad person, while ignoring the massive violations of Americans’ Constitutional rights – rights which apply to everyone, regardless of race, class, or political party – which Snowden was trying to expose.

Fleitz further argues that Snowden caused serious harm to national security and was not a whistleblower, yet provides no evidence to back up this statement, which is surprising in light of the fact that Snowden’s actions match popular understandings of what a whistleblower is. Likewise, Fleitz emphasizes that Snowden was a “poor performer and a disgruntled employee,” as if anyone who has ever been a disgruntled employee is of bad character and cannot be trusted. Implicitly, Fleitz takes the position that our privacy is not important when it comes to data. In our digital age, this seems absurd, since more of our private information and communications exist as data on computers rather than on paper.
